---
layout: post
title: "5th lecture, IP addresses, internet protocols, HTTP"
author: "Utsav"
categories: Back-End Dev
---

-- how computers sends and receives data across the internet?[^1]

- data travels across networks, IP addresses make than happen (postal system analogy)
- IP:
  - version 4:
    - here IP address contains four octet. It's separated by periods or dots.
    - For example 192.0.2.235
  - version 6:
    - here IP address contains eight groups of hexadecimal digits separated by a colon.
    - For example 4527:0a00:1567:0200:ff00:0042:8329
- every computer on a network is assigned an IP address.
- when you send data across a network, you send the data as a series of messages called IP packets, also known as data grams.

- IP packets:

  - IP packet contain a header and a payload or the data.
  - recipient address, sender address (postal analogy)
  - in HEADER: destination IP address, source IP address
  - in PAYLOAD: contains data of the packet, and some other protocols

- issues sometimes happen when sending multiple letters:(postal analogy)

  - they arrive out of order
  - package can get damaged
  - it can get lost

- issues in IP packets:

  - IP packets arrive out of order
  - become damaged or corrupted
  - dropped or lost during transit
  - so to beat this, PAYLOAD contains some other protocols too (another message inside the IP packet)

- 2 most common protocols are:

  - transmission control protocol (TCP):
    - TCP can solve all three of the previously mentioned issues but at the cost of a small delay when sending the data.
    - this protocol is used for sending the data that must arrive correctly and in order such as a text or image files
  - user datagram protocol (UDP):
    - UDP solves the corrupt packet issue but packets can still arrive out of order or not arrive at all.
    - this protocol is used for sending data that can tolerate some data loss such as voice calls or live video streaming
  - both of these protocols contain payloads that contain further protocols inside of them.

-- HTTP

- core operational protocol of www
- HTTP is the communication protocol you use whenever you browse the web.
- it is what enables your web browser to communicate with a web server that hosts a website.
  - it is a protocol used by web clients and web servers
- it is a protocol used for transferring web resources such as HTML documents, images, styles, and other files.
  - It works to transfer web resources such as HTML files, and is the foundation of any data exchanges on the web.
- HTTP is a request response based protocol.
- web browser or client sends an HTTP request to a server and the web server sends the HTTP response back to the browser.
- REQUEST:
  - HTTP requests have syntax which consists of a method, path, version and headers.
  - HTTP method describes the type of action that the client must perform.
  - the primary or the most commonly used HTTP methods are, GET, POST, PUT, and DELETE
    - GET method is used to retrieve information from the given server.
    - POST request is used to send data to the server.
    - PUT method updates whatever currently exists on the web server with something else.
    - DELETE method removes the resource.
    - the path is the representation of where the resource is stored on the web server.
  - There are multiple versions of the HTTP protocol
    - Versions 1.1 and 2.0 are the most used.
  - Headers contain additional information about the request and the client that is making the request.
- RESPONSE:

  - Following the header, the response will optionally contain a message body consisting of the response contents such as the HTML document, the image file and so forth.
  - HTTP status codes contained within the header indicate if the HTTP request successfully completed.
  - The code values are in the range of 100-599 and are grouped by purpose.
  - The status message is a text representation of the status code.
    - the status code is a three-digit number.
  - There are five groups of status codes. They are grouped by the first digit of the error number.
    - Informational is grouped 100-199.
    - Successful responses are grouped from 200-299.
    - Redirection message are 300-399.
    - Client error responses range from 400-499, and
    - server error responses are 500-599.
  - information responses are provisional responses sent by the server. These responses are interim before the actual response.
    - the most common information response is 100 continue, which indicates that the web client should continue to request or ignore the response if the request is already finished.
    - successful responses indicate that the request was successfully processed by the web server, with the most common success response being 200 OK.
  - redirection responses indicate to the web client that the requested resource has been moved to a different path.
    - the most common response codes used are 301 moved permanently and 302 found.
    - the difference between the redirection messages 301 and 302 is that 302 indicates a temporary redirection, the resource has been temporarily moved.
    - when web browsers receive these responses, they will automatically submit the request for the resource at the new path.
  - client error responses indicate that the requests contained bad syntax or content and cannot be processed by the web server.
    - the most common codes used are:
      - 400 is used when the web browser or client submitted bad data to the web server,
      - 401 is used to indicate that the user must log into an account before the request can be processed,
      - 403 is used to indicate the request was valid, but that the web server is refusing to process it, this is often used to indicate that a user does not have sufficient permissions to execute an action in a web application,
      - 404 is used to indicate that the request resource was not found on the web server.
  - server error responses indicate that a failure occurred on the web server while trying to process the request
    - the most common code used is 500 internal server error, which is a generic error status indicating that the server failed to process the request.

- HTTPS is the secure version of HTTP.

  - it is used for secure communication between two computers so that nobody else can see the information being sent and received.
  - it does this by using encryption
  - like in HTTP, the requests and responses still behave in the same way and have the same content.
  - the big difference is that before the content is sent, it is turned into a secret code.
  - only the other computer can turn the secret code back into its original content. If someone else was to look at the code, it wouldn't be understandable.

[^1]: [Who invented internet?](https://youtu.be/21eFwbb48sE)
