---
layout: post
title: "4th lecture, internet, web server, website, web browser, web hosting, cloud"
author: "Utsav"
categories: Back-End Dev
---

-- how the internet works?[^4]

- network is made up of at least two devices that connect and communicate via a wired or wireless connection.
- network switch
  - connects computer devices and allows them to communicate with each other
  - network switch can connect to othee network switches
  - more network switches, then you have interconnected network (internet)
- client-server model
- internet connects the entire world!

-- what is a web server and how does it work?[^0]

- A server is a computer that runs applications and services ranging from websites to instant messaging.
- It's called a server because it provides a service to another computer and its user also known as the client.
- typically stored in a data center with hundreds or thousands of other servers, connected to the internet.
- data center:
  - continuous power
  - continuous internet connection
  - are kept 24/7
  - located around the world
  - helps website to give access to content quickly
- server hardware (physical components of a server):
  - every data center has specific purpose:
  - media (lot of hard drive space)
  - computation (fast processor, lot of memory)
- the code that runs in the hardware is known as the software.

-- web server functions:

- website storage and admini
- security
- data storage
- managing email
- \* handle web request (the process is known as request-response cycle)
- designed to handle 1000s of requests per second

-- webpage & website!

- webpage is a document that displays images, texts, videos and other content in the web browser
- a website is a collection of webpages that link together.
- common tech used in websites:
  - HTML structures the content you see,
  - CSS controls the colors and style,
  - JavaScript is responsible for the user interaction.
- the way HTML describes the content is known as markup
- CSS adds styling
- JS is programming language built into the browser (provide tools-interactivity, data processing, control, action)
- JavaScript is the powerhouse of a web page; it has the ability to manipulate the content that you see on the screen as you interact with it.

- page rendering:
  - when a copy of the webpage is sent from the web server to your browser, each line of code is processed in sequential order from first to last.
  - As each line is interpreted, the browser creates the building blocks, which is the visual representation you see on the screen.
  - This creation process is known as page rendering, the response from the web server must be a complete web page in order to fulfill the request, to show the page in the browser.

-- What is a web browser and how does it work?[^1] [^3]

- a web browser is a software application that you use to browse the World Wide Web.
- once the browser is open on your device, there is the address bar where you input the address of the website that you want to visit.
- the address is commonly known as URL.
- the URL contains the protocol or the HTTP, the domain name, usually the name of the website, and the file path, or the path to the page that is displayed.
- when you make a request using this URL, the browser and server communicate using a protocol known as the Hypertext Transfer Protocol or HTTP.
- once the web browser receives the content, it displays it on the screen of your device. This exchange of information is made possible by something known as the request-response cycle.
- now, how request-response cycle works?

-- web hosting:

- web hosting is a service where you place your website and files on the hosting companies web server.
- hosting spaces available to individuals/companies:

  - shared hosting
  - virtual private hosting
  - dedicated hosting
  - cloud hosting

- shared hosting:

  - cheapest
  - share service processing power
  - memory
  - bandwidth with other websites
  - best for small website with small number of visitors

- virtual private service (VPS):

  - this is more expensive than shared hosting.
  - here we have dedicated CPU, memory, bandwidth resources
  - runs on hardware server with other VPS instances

- dedicated hosting:

  - more expensive than a VPS hosting
  - here we have hardware server, dedicated to user only
  - all hardware, CPU, memory, bandwidth resources

- cloud hosting[^2]:

  - here the website runs in cloud environment, which spans across multiple physical and virtual servers
  - if 1 server fails, website will run on different server & stay online
  - unlimited resources at hand without any hardware limitations
  - pay based on resource use
  - many majorweb apps operate in this manner

[^0] : [What is a Web Server?](https://www.nginx.com/resources/glossary/web-server/)
[^1] : [What is a Web Browser?](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/browsers/what-is-a-browser/)
[^3] : [Browser Engines](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Browser_engine)
[^2] : [What is Cloud Computing?](https://youtu.be/mxT233EdY5c)
[^4] : [Who invented internet?](https://youtu.be/21eFwbb48sE)
